When we first saw conditional statements we saw that we could nest them inside of one another if and
then inside that if we could have another if we can do the same thing with for loops we can nest loops
and I'll show you some situations where this makes sense.
But first we're going to try and walk through how it works.
Sometimes it can be a little bit confusing or difficult to wrap your head around.
So we're gonna start with a single loop.
Let's just go from one to ten but I equal one I less than or equal to 10.
And then I plus plus and I'm going to console that log the string outer loop and then also I and we
get outer loop one down to outer loop 10.
And now I'm going to add in a second inner loop.
Now this loop is going to go the other direction from 10 down to 1.
So we'll start with left and then what should we name the variable.
This is a really important topic and we'll actually come back to it in the next section in more detail.
But for now you should know you can get away with naming your variable eye again which seems like it
shouldn't work.
If we type in our console let equal zero and then I tried to make another eye with a different value.
I get an error says I has already been declared but in this case these eyes.
This let I and this let I have a different scope.
We haven't talked about scope.
That's what we'll talk about in the next section.
So for now we're not going to go with AI and in general it doesn't make sense it's a bad idea to use
the same name in a nested loop.
It's confusing to look at and if you needed access to both these variables inside this inner loop you
wouldn't have it if you named them the same thing.
There's no way to reference both of them and at least not an easy way.
So that's not what we're going to do.
We're gonna go with J which is pretty standard if you use AI then move on to J.
For nested loop and then if there's a loop inside of J use k and usually you shouldn't have more or
you should try and avoid more nesting.
I try and just do two loops whenever possible at most.
OK so we'll go from 10 and we'll keep going.
Wild J is greater than or equal to zero and we'll subtract about two each time instead of one.
So our outer loop is going to go from one to 10.
The Inner Loop will go from 10 to zero by subtracting twos and in here I'll control that log inner loop
and then J.
Okay let's see what we get.
Okay so let's take a look at how this is working but I'm going to do to make it easier to see the difference.
I'm going to indent this string I'm just gonna add some spaces on the inner loop and that way we get
some differentiation.
So if we look at the outer loop only we're going from one to 10.
Here is the first time through that outer loop.
Then the second time third time all the way down to here but every single time this outer loop runs
just a single iteration the inner loop completes its full cycle.
So that's why we end up with 10 8 6 4 2 0 and then we hit the end of this loop here.
So that means we're at the end of this first cycle.
Then it starts over.
I now goes up to 2 and we cancel that log.
Outer Loop then we hit this loop and it has to finish executing so it does its whole thing 10 8 6 4
2 0 and then that's the end of this outer loop.
We start over.
So it takes a long time.
It doesn't.
It's not actually a long time it's extremely extremely quick but it takes a long time relatively for
the outer loop to run again.
This inner loop completes its full cycle every single time the outer loop just iterate.
Once you can see overall we have a lot of iterations and the relationship here is if we have X iterations
on an outer loop and Y inner iterations on the inner loop we will be running X Y times or we'll have
basically multiplied the number of times this runs by the number of times this runs.
And that's how many total iterations you have.
All right.
So this example is kind of pointless.
If we were just trying to generate numbers however many numbers this is if we wanted to generate these
exact numbers fine.
This is a good way to do it.
If for some reason we need 1 and then 10 8 6 4 2 0 that's fine.
But this isn't really a great showcase of why you might want nested iteration or nested for loops.
So the first example I'll show you involves that game 2048 from a couple of videos ago.
Here is a game board after I've lost the game I just randomly pressed arrow keys to try and finish it
and it is a four by four grid.
Each cell has a corresponding value and then we'll calculate a score by summing all of these cells together.
And I structured my own version of this that the data at least in an array I'm calling game board and
it's based exactly off of this score or this board that I created by losing the game for 30 to eight
and four is the first row 4 3 2 8 and 4 and there are 4 rows.
So to sum all of the values here I need to loop twice the first loop to move this down so we can grip
it together.
The first loop is just going to iterate over this outer array.
So one two three four elements.
So for let I equals zero I is less than game board doubt length high.
Plus plus.
So this is going to iterate through game board and it's at least going to give me a number that I can
use to access game board of I and I could just console that log that but I'll just be printing out each
individual row via refresh the page.
There we go.
So I can't just sum this.
I can't say a total variable plus equals this entire array.
I need to then loop through each one of these summaries and for each value add it to some variable.
So the question is how do I loop through this array here.
What I would probably do is make a new variable I'll call it row which will equal game board of IE.
Because this outer loop is just giving us an entire row at a time when we access using IE we get 1 row
and then I'm going to loop over row.
So depending on how many items are here it's always 4.
I'm not going to hardcoded because we could have a 5 by 5 game board or an 8 by 8 game board.
I'm going to use the length of the row so to loop over row.
All I need to do is 4.
Let let's go with j equals zero.
J is less than row dot length J plus plus.
And why don't we start by constant logging row of high and up here.
I'll cancel that log the row so you can just see the relationship refresh the page and it's hard to
see what's going on here.
Well I actually made a mistake here.
A pretty common one.
I use the variable i instead of this loop.
There's nothing wrong with it in a technical sense javascript doesn't care but as far as my logic is
concerned the variable i want is J.
J is going to be referring to each element in a row.
I is referring to the actual Roe.
So in the first iteration I is zero and I'm then using that to access zero item zero item zero item
zero.
Which is why I get all of these forms printed out.
So I want to access J because J.
We'll be changing each time.
And here's what we get.
So our outer loop starts.
We get this row and then we loop over this for thirty to eight and four.
That's each value.
The Inner Loop finishes there's nothing afterwards.
So the outer loop is done.
Not iteration and we start the next cycle.
So now I is set to 1 which gives us this index and we loop over this row.
So why don't we sum it all together now.
I'll get rid of these constant logs and do that I need a total variable but total lets go with total
score started at zero and then in here I'm simply going to total score plus equals and then row of J.
Remember row is this entire element each time through and then J Give me a number like zero.
So I'm going to take row of zero.
Add that to total score row of one row of two growth three add those eleven and then loop starts over.
And now we're working on this array and then I do row of 0 and keep adding them in.
Let's see what we get.
If I refresh the page I didn't print out total score but you can see it over here if I type it.
Two hundred and thirty.
So this is still kind of a silly scenario but this is a very real example of one you would use nested
loops.
We need to have at least two loops to access each element because we have two arrays or nested and if
we had further separated we would need another loop.
All right.
So that's it for now.
Just take away the fact that we can have nested loops each iteration through the outer loop.
We have a complete cycle of the inner loop before the outer loop increments or moves on to its next
iteration.